create v4 data doc (#927)
Uniswap/docs: docs/contracts/v4/data_hub.mdx

---
id: data_hub
title: Data Hub
sidebar_position: 5
---

# Uniswap v4 Data Hub

> Welcome to the Uniswap v4 Data Hub — your central resource for understanding v4 metrics, hook data standards, and accessing v4 data tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the Uniswap v4 Data Hub — your central resource for understanding Uniswap v4 metrics, hook data standards, and accessing Uniswap v4 data tools.
```

:::info 

> Join the conversation on v4 hook data standards in our Telegram group: https://t.me/v4_hooks_data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Join the conversation on v4 hook data standards in our [Telegram group](https://t.me/v4_hooks_data)
```

:::

## v4 Metric Terminology

Since Uniswap v4 introduced hooks, many traditional metrics—like total liquidity locked (TVL)—can become confusing. For instance, today, most dashboards and data platforms measure only the liquidity in the v4 singleton contract. But hooks can also hold liquidity in their own contracts (e.g., for custom curves), meaning a portion of v4’s true TVL goes uncounted.

> To address this gap, we establish a shared standard naming conventions for Uniswap v4 metrics and clarifies what each metric actually measures. Our goal is to help the entire data community—from dashboard builders to indexers—share the same consistent framework and language around v4 analytics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this gap, we establish a standard naming convention for Uniswap v4 metrics and clarifies what each metric actually measures. Our goal is to help the entire data community—from dashboard builders to indexers—share the same consistent framework and language around v4 analytics.
```

### TVL (Total Value Locked)

#### Overall TVL

> The overall TVL in Uniswap v4 is the total value (typically in USD) of all liquidity locked in the protocol. This includes liquidity held within the singleton v4 Pool Manager contract and any liquidity locked in external, initialized hook contracts. A hook contract is considered "initialized" once it is registered with at least one Uniswap v4 pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The overall TVL in Uniswap v4 is the total value (typically in USD) of all liquidity locked in the protocol. This includes liquidity held within the singleton v4 PoolManager contract and any liquidity locked in external, initialized hook contracts. A hook contract is considered "initialized" once it is registered with at least one Uniswap v4 pool.
```

Reviewer: can u ctrl F replace `Pool Manager -> PoolManager`

![Overall TVL](./guides/images/v4_overall_tvl.png)

#### Singleton TVL

> Singleton TVL refers to the portion of total liquidity held exclusively within Uniswap v4’s core (singleton) Pool Manager contract. Even if a pool is initialized with an external hook, the singleton TVL counts only the assets locked in the core contract itself, excluding any external liquidity held by hook contracts.

Reviewer: can we make sure all `Pool Manager` references are `PoolManager`

```suggestion
Singleton TVL refers to the portion of total liquidity held exclusively within Uniswap v4’s core (singleton) PoolManager contract. Even if a pool is initialized with an external hook, the singleton TVL counts only the assets locked in the core contract itself, excluding any external liquidity held by hook contracts.
```

![Singleton TVL](./guides/images/v4_singleton_tvl.png)

#### External TVL
External TVL is the total liquidity held outside the Uniswap v4 core Pool Manager contract, specifically within initialized hook contracts. A hook contract is considered "initialized" once it is registered with at least one Uniswap v4 pool.

![External TVL](./guides/images/v4_external_tvl.png)

#### Hook TVL 

> Hook TVL is the total liquidity in pools that utilize hooks. It includes both regular hooked pools, where liquidity remains in the Uniswap v4 Pool Manager contract, and special hooked pools (e.g., custom curves), where liquidity resides in external hook contracts.

Reviewer: add a sentence something like:

"Hook TVL can be thought of as total TVL minus vanilla-pool TVL" ?

We are actively collaborating with the broader Uniswap community and hook developers to refine our TVL definitions and measurement methods for these advanced use cases. We’ll share updates on these revised TVL standards as soon as they’re finalized.
:::

### Volume
Volume represents the total trading activity (typically in USD) on Uniswap v4, measured per trade. For example, swapping 2,673.83 USDC for 1 ETH (using the ETH price at Feb 13, 5:23 PM ET) counts as $2,673.83 in volume—not double the amount from both assets in the trade.

#### Total Volume (over a period)
Total Volume (over a period) is the cumulative trading volume across all Uniswap v4 pools within a given timeframe, including both vanilla and hooked pools.

![Total Volume](./guides/images/v4_total_volume.png)

#### Hooked Volume (over a period)
Hooked Volume (over a period) is the total trading volume in hooked pools over a given timeframe. This includes swap amounts facilitated by return delta hooks (e.g., custom curves or async swaps) that use their own custom logic and/or liquidity.
![Hooked Volume](./guides/images/v4_hooked_volume.png)

#### Vanilla Volume (over a period)

> Vanilla Volume (over a period) is the total trading volume in vanilla pools—i.e., pools that are not initialized with any hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vanilla Volume (over a period) is the total trading volume in vanilla pools — i.e. pools that are not initialized with a hook contract
```

![Vanilla Volume](./guides/images/v4_vanilla_volume.png)

:::note

> You can already query holistic volume from `dex.trades` on Dune and Allium, which use trace data indexing. We're also working with Uniswap Labs to apply this to the v4 open-source subgraph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can already query holistic volume from `dex.trades` on Dune and Allium, which use trace data indexing. The Uniswap team is working to apply this to the v4 open-source subgraph.
```

:::

## Hook Data Standards

> Although hooks can include any Solidity code, they all anchor on the [10 core hook functions](https://docs.uniswap.org/contracts/v4/concepts/hooks#core-hook-functions) in Uniswap v4. These functions correspond to key points in a pool’s lifecycle (for example, before/after a swap or liquidity modification) and provide clear “entry points” for customization. For reference, see the [Hooks.sol](https://github.com/Uniswap/v4-core/blob/main/src/libraries/Hooks.sol) contract in the Uni v4 core library and the [BaseHook.sol](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/uniswap-hooks/blob/master/src/base/BaseHook.sol) template made by OpenZeppelin, which defines all hook entry points.

Reviewer: instead of hard linking `docs.uniswap.org/...` you can do relative pathing i.e. `./concepts/hooks`

```
event HookSwap(
    bytes32 indexed id,       // v4 pool id
    address indexed sender,   // router of the swap
    int128 amount0,
    int128 amount1,
    uint128 hookLPfeeAmount0,
    uint128 hookLPfeeAmount1
);

event HookFee(
    bytes32 indexed id,       // v4 pool id
    address indexed sender,   // router of the swap
    uint128 feeAmount0,
    uint128 feeAmount1
);

event HookModifyLiquidity(
    bytes32 indexed id,       // v4 pool id
    address indexed sender,   // router address
    int128 amount0,
    int128 amount1
);

event HookBonus(
    bytes32 indexed id,       // v4 pool id
    uint128 amount0,
    uint128 amount1
);

```

### Use Case Flow Charts
The following diagrams illustrate when to emit each event during a hook’s lifecycle. Remember, these scenarios can overlap. Your hook might be both “custom curve” and “hook fee” at once, so you would emit events for both flows.

#### Custom Curve
![Custom Curve Flow](./guides/images/hook_diagram_custom_curves.png)

> In v4, developers can bypass the built-in v3 concentrated liquidity by using [custom accounting](https://docs.uniswap.org/contracts/v4/guides/custom-accounting), allowing them to implement their own swap curves. This enables custom liquidity provisioning and swap logic. [Custom curves](https://www.v4-by-example.org/hooks/custom-curve) are enabled through `Hooks.BEFORE_SWAP_FLAG` and `Hooks.BEFORE_SWAP_RETURNS_DELTA_FLAG`. Examples of such curves include:

Reviewer: a few more references in this file where we're hard-linking the domain. would just ctrl+F "https://docs.uniswap.org/"

Reviewer: also lets not link v4-by-example, its pretty out of date and dont have bandwidth to maintain 😭
